---
layout: post
title: Flood It
desc: A web implementation of the puzzle game Flood It.
proj-url: https://frigidrain.github.io/flood-it
proj-num: 03
thumb: FloodIt.png
---



## Introduction

In the game Flood It, there is a grid of coloured squares and the user's objective is to fill the entire grid with one colour. Each turn, the user can "flood" every cell connected to the top left corner of the grid with a single colour. All cells connected to the top left corner are changed to the designated colour. For two cells to be connected, they must have the same colour and be adjacent vertically or horizontally. The objective of the user is to flood the entire grid in the least number of turns.

{% include captioned_image.html description="Image of a Flood It board" url="images/FloodItBoard.gif" local=true %}

Solving a game of Flood It belongs to the set of [NP-hard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NP-hardness) problems meaning it is very difficult to find an exact solution.[^1] One simple algorithm to find an approximate solution is to choose the colour that will flood the largest area at each step. This algorithm is known as a [greedy algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greedy_algorithm) since it takes the locally optimal--but not necessarily globally optimal--action at each step.

## Purpose

The purpose of this game--other than having fun, of course--is to explore how the greedy algorithm performs in practice since it is not easy to analyze its performance. In my experience, it is pretty difficult to find a solution better than the optimal one produced by the computer. This might suggest that the greedy algorithm performs quite well on randomly generated puzzles.

## Game

In the game, the computer solves the puzzle by employing the greedy algorithm mentioned above. The objective of the user is to try to beat the solution using fewer turns than the computer. The number of turns that the user used compared to the computer is displayed at the top as X/Y where X and Y are the number of turns used by the player and computer, respectively. The user can also ask the computer to solve the puzzle step-by-step using greedy algorithm by clicking the "Solve For Me" button.

## Algorithms

#### Simple Cycling

The simplest algorithm for solving Flood It is to cycle through all of the colours until the board is filled. This will always solve the problem since at each turn, there must be a colour that gets us closer to the solution. This algorithm gives us a solution that is at most C times the optimal number of turns where C is the number of colours available.[^2] Why is this true? Since each step of the optimal solution chooses some colour, if we try all of them we use up C turns for each turn that the optimal solution uses.

#### Greedy

Unlike the simple cycling algorithm, there is no limit to how many turns the greedy algorithm uses compared to the optimum. The greedy algorithm is the following: at each turn, we choose the colour that gives us the most "territory". Although intuitively this seems like a good strategy, this may give us something far from the best solution. Consider the following puzzle:

{% include captioned_image.html url="https://kunigami.files.wordpress.com/2013/09/flood-it-bad.png" description="A puzzle for which the greedy algorithm performs badly" source="https://kunigami.wordpress.com/2012/09/16/flood-it-an-exact-approach/" %}

The optimal solution takes three turns, which is the best we can possibly get. The solution is to flood the board in the following sequence: blue, red, then orange. Notice that the greedy algorithm will choose red first as it increases our territory the most. Then, it will choose orange then red then orange and so on. It will choose blue last. This is much worse than the optimal solution.

We are interested to see if it's easy for a user to beat a solution produced by the greedy algorithm even though it has been shown that it performs badly in some cases. Try it yourself!

## Technology

The game is written in Javascript/[jQuery](https://jquery.com/) and HTML.

#### Footnotes

[^1]:[Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.4420) that shows that Flood-It is NP-hard for boards of height >= 3.
[^2]:[Blog post](https://kunigami.wordpress.com/2012/09/16/flood-it-an-exact-approach/) that shows that the simple cycling algorithm gives an approximation ratio of C, the number of colours.