---
layout: post
title: Thesis
desc: My undergraduate thesis on improving an algorithm for 2D strip packing.
proj-url: https://frigidrain.github.io/2dspp-lp
proj-num: 04
thumb: 2dspp.png
label_wip: true
---

## Introduction

In the 2-dimensional strip packing problem (2DSPP), we are given a set of rectangles of height and width greater than 0 and less than or equal to 1, and we wish to pack them in a container (or strip) of width 1 and infinite height. We want the packing to have the smallest height possible. The problem is [NP-hard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NP-hardness) meaning it is very difficult to find the arrangement of rectangles which gives us the smallest height. When we can't find the exact solution easily, we try to design [approximation algorithms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approximation_algorithm) which give solutions which are not optimal, but within a factor of the optimum.

The high multiplicity strip packing problem is a type of 2DSPP where we are given a set of different types of rectangles (rectangles with different widths and heights), but we want to pack a certain number of each of these rectangles. Therefore, many of the rectangles that we wish to pack are duplicates.

For my undergraduate thesis, I was looking to improve upon an algorithm for solving the high multiplicity strip packing problem in the case where there are only four rectangle types.[^1] I wrote a program that visualizes solutions for the rectangle packing problem to give me ideas for solving it.

## General Idea

One way to solve the strip packing problem is by first solving the **fractional strip packing problem**. In the fractional version of the problem, we are allowed to cheat by cutting rectangles in pieces and packing these fractional pieces instead. It turns out that the fractional strip packing problem is much easier to solve than the strip packing problem, and we can find an optimal solution quickly. 

{%include captioned_image.html url="images/packing.png" local=true description="An example of a fractional packing. Notice how some rectangles are not whole." %}

Once we have an optimal solution for the fractional strip packing problem, we must convert the fractional packing into an integral packing. This means we need to combine the fractional pieces into whole rectangles such that there no fractional pieces left over. This will always increase the height of the packing since we need more space to fit whole rectangles than fractional rectangles. This is the hard part. How do we combine the fractional parts into whole rectangles without increasing the height of the packing by too much?

Since the fractional solution uses space as efficiently as possible, the optimal solution cannot have a lower height. This is a very useful property since it means that the height of the fractional solution acts as a lower bound for the height of the optimal solution--whatever the optimal is.  For example, if we increase the height of the fractional solution by K when we convert it into an integral solution then our resulting solution cannot be greater than the height of the optimal solution plus K.

In Price's paper, he found a way to pack K rectangle types with a height increase of K - 1. For four rectangle types, this gives us a height increase of 3. The aim of my thesis is to try to pack four rectangles with a height increase of less than 3.

## Applications

At first glance, it might not be obvious how solving the 2DSPP is useful. Here is an interesting application of the problem:

Imagine that you have a rectangular slab of material, which could be cloth, wood, glass etc. You want to cut various pieces out of it for building furniture, making cloth etc., but you want to minimize the amount of material that is wasted when you do this. The slab of material in this case corresponds to the strip in 2DSPP, and the pieces that we need to cut out from the material correspond to the rectangles.

## Technology

The program was written in Javascript and uses HTML5 Canvas to draw the shapes.

## Footnotes

[^1]:[High Multiplicity Strip Packing](http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3369&context=etd) by Devon Price